Act I
In act I, Shakespeare sets the settings of the different plots that are going to take place during the play, like the revenge of Hamlet, or the Fortinbras’ desire to conquer Denmark.
Scene 1
It’s the winter, there’s heavy darkness, the ghost appeared twice, and it’s an outpost just before the castle: a lot of tension, all expressed in “Who’s there”. Bernardo come to relieve Francisco, and Marcellus and Horatio come to investigate about the ghost. Horatio was sceptical, but sees the ghost in Hamlet’s armour, the one that the king used to fight with in Norway, and introduces Fortinbras’ plot. They decide to tell young Hamlet what happened. There is a lot of loyalty, death & after death, sanity/ insanity, revenge, family, and duty.
Scene 2
Claudius “mourns” Hamlet, but very quickly speaks about his marriage with Gertrude (guiltiness, appearance v reality, betrayal). Then, he talks about Fortinbras to the two ambassadors, he already want to spy. Laertes can go to France while Hamlet is trapped in the castle. Hamlet, still mourning his father’s death is revolted about how quickly everybody move on, and is rude (spiritually) to Claudius and angry to his mother. Claudius appears mean “your father lost a father” etc. and especially when he’s preparing himself for the custom “the king’s rouse”. Alone, Hamlet exclaims he wants to die and disappear (oppression), why has God made suicide a sin? Anguished, he laments his father’s death and express anger against her mother (Niobe, symbol of the mother’s grief). He is even sexual. He quiets suddenly, when Horatio and Marcellus enters, telling him what happened in the tower; Hamlet, interested, decide to watch with them tonight.
Scene 3
Laertes prepare to leave to France, he gives advice to Ophelia, telling her to stay away from Hamlet because he’s too far above her by birth to be able to love her honourably (sexuality, caution, social games, disorder of Hamlet). Ophelia promises to keep the secret, but when Polonius enters, she tells him what they talked about (Weakness). Polonius nevertheless started talking with Laertes, advising him how to behave (honour, appearance v reality) and especially to be careful with money. Whereas for Ophelia, he tells her to keep her virginity because it’s the only thing which gives her honour => “Be something scanter of your maiden presence”
Scene 4
On the platform, Horatio, Marcellus and Hamlet watch, especially looking for the ghost, last scene before revenge plot. There are irreconcilable opposites (Claudius drinks, Hamlet refuse to share the elixir, which could be a metaphor for the acceptance of the killing) “vicious mole (fault) of nature”, in addition to opposites, hero as a paragon. When the ghost appears, Hamlet questions (he always questions every detail of life: Hamlet’s inertia) the ghost (good or bad?) and so do Horatio about Hamlet’s sanity. “Something is rotten in the state of Denmark” by Marcellus.
Scene 5
Revenge plot, Hamlet seems surprise, even though he had ‘doubts’ before. The trapped ghost asks Hamlet to risk damnation to save him (selfish). The ghost is not as pure as Hamlet wants to imagine (idealization of the father), because he doesn’t talk about Fortinbras but about Gertrude’s sexuality, (he even says Claudius’s “natural gifts were poor” compared to his). Rottenness again, even more morbid, gothic, graphic, gory etc. and if the king is rotten, the state is. Not confessing imprisoned Hamlet, but he spare Gertrude (“leave her to heaven”). Hamlet swears to kill Claudius.
Act II
It’s the act of spying, could be Claudius or Polonius, both want to be puppeteers while Hamlet is preparing his plan of vengeance
Scene 1
Polonius, despite all the trust he has towards Laertes, dispatches Reynaldo to France with money and written notes for Laertes (spy and lies). Ophelia enters, tells him that Hamlet have conducted strangely with her, Polonius is convinced that is in love with Ophelia and want to tell Claudius of his idea (madness, Ophelia being a tool).
Scene 2
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are welcome in the castle by the king and queen. They have to spy on Hamlet’s actions and are asked so because they are long friends of Hamlet. Gertrude says “overhasty marriage” (guilty? Regrets?), and is aware of the change of comportment of her son. Polonius enters and announces the return of the ambassadors and the fact that he knows the causes of the madness. Ambassadors announces Fortinbras’ intension to invade Poland with his warriors (3000 given in money by the sick and impotent old Norway against Fortinbras word not to break the treaty –Loyalty, Duty, and father/son). Polonius then reveals the supposed causes of Hamlet’s madness, he’s funny (“I’ll be brief” blablabla…), even Gertrude stops him  wordplay stops tension. Their plan is to let Polonius speaks to Hamlet while Claudius and Gertrude spy on their conversation. But Polonius isn’t clever and doesn’t understand Hamlet is making fun of him (madness, spy, truth/ lies) in the topic of the book or the “except my life” wordplay. R & G then appears, Hamlet is very happy. They discuss Hamlet’s problems and he suddenly ask them why they came, they lied but Hamlet tells them he knows the king and queen sent them. They confess (truth/lies, duty, honour, friendship) it is true and Hamlet says that he know why: because he has lost all his joy and “the earth seems to him sterile”. Rosencrantz smiles and says he wonders how Hamlet will receive a theatrical troupe that is currently traveling toward the castle. The trumpets blow, announcing the arrival of the actors. He then put distance with his mother (“aunt-mother”: in the play, the use of family vocabulary mimes the characters’ thoughts) and tells them his madness goes and comes with the wind. Polonius enters and introduced (extended version) the players, Hamlet talks about his daughter. The player then demonstrate their talent by playing a speech on the fall of Troy (destiny, acting (play-within a play), guilt, treason, love & sex (female sexuality, their lack of option, artificial, devious etc.), spying, ambition, betrayal). The parallel story highlights Gertrude’s (Hecuba) lack of mourns and Hamlet (Pyrrhus, Achilles’ son) inaction (Achille being killed by king of Troy –Claudius-). He wants them to play The Murder of Gonzago, a modified version that will mime Claudius’s kill.
Soliloquy:
2 parts: Firstly, Hamlet curses himself for his inability to act (inertia, lack of impulsivity) even if he has the intention to do so, self-critique. But as he reflexes about his mother Hecuba, the plot of vengeance appears again and he imagines a plan to ensure the ghost’s good intentions. He wants to make players play his father’s death, and Claudius reaction will help him decide if he has to take action or not. “make mad the guilty”  (duty) “the play is the thing wherein I’ll catch the conscience of the king”
Themes:
Spying
Ambition
Lies/betrayal
Appearance v reality
Duty
Destiny
Passivity
Acting
Corrupt
Treason/honour
Revenge/acceptance
guilt
religion
madness

Act 3
It’s when Hamlet experiences an existential crisis again, he reveals himself in front of Ophelia and he manages to show his uncle’s treason, he will then have to act. Hamlet is nearly omnipresent is this act, every apparitions will be characterised by a special mood and intension.
Scene 1
R&G report for their investigation (spying, duty, treason), telling notably Hamlet is very interested in the theatre. Claudius then ask Gertrude to leave also, because he wants to plot something with Polonius and Ophelia, as the father will spy on her daughter’s conversation with Hamlet
Soliloquy:
Existential crisis, is life worth the effort? (Sleep and death) “to die, to sleep, no more”. But he’s too coward to act (don’t want to go to hell: too much thoughts, lack of actions). Shakespeare illustrates society’s influence over characters like Hamlet. In the first act of the play, Hamlet cursed God for making suicide immoral. Hamlet looks forward the sleep of death but he is too much afraid of what could come next (coward – endure, fight or die?).  Style: massive use of metaphor and imagery language => wants to define nature of death.
Following:
Hamlet sees Ophelia approaching, she has been asked to give back Hamlet’s token of love (spy, female status, game of society). Hamlet angrily denies having given her anything and begin to criticize women in general (Hamlet = douche  appearance v reality), Ophelia is a hypocrite “God has given you (women in general) one face and you make yourselves another”. She lies (“at home”). Hamlet accuses beauty to corrupt honesty. He makes parallel between nunnery-fishmonger and so being nasty; he could say don’t pretend to be pure, you are going to sink to their level (treason, passivity, revenge?). He is contradictory: “I loved you once” “I loved you not” (lies/betrayal). Very mean “marry a fool; for wise men know well enough what monsters you make of them”. But in the end, he want to protect her: go to a nunnery. He leaves, and Ophelia, as pure as she is, mourns the loss of her Hamlet “nobble mind” to this mad character. There is disharmony. King and Polonius emerge from the tapestry. Claudius says that Hamlet strange behaviour does not come from his love to Ophelia but from his soul, that melancholy has transformed. Hopefully, sending Hamlet to England shall solve the problem. Polonius agrees that this is a good idea, but he still believes that Hamlet’s agitation comes from loving Ophelia. He asks Claudius to send Hamlet to Gertrude’s chamber after the play, where Polonius can hide again and watch unseen; he hopes to learn whether Hamlet is really mad with love. Claudius agree that they must always spy on Hamlet
Scene 2
Hamlet instructs the players on how to play, insisting on how the theatre reflects the nature and society. It is important for Hamlet that the players highlight “some necessary question of the play”: Hamlet means that every play has a theme, the murder of Gonzaga is revenge. It is ironic, because Hamlet gives an advice he does not follow himself. After Polonius visit, Hamlet tells Horatio he is tired of flattery. Horatio will spy Claudius during the play (spy is the only –possible- action taken by each character in the castle to get their way). Hamlet persists in wordplay, being insulting: Hamlet shows misogyny (Ophelia’s “nothing” (it means vagina) + Gertrude hasty marriage, mother’s sexuality). The dumb show announces what is going to happen. In the middle of the play Claudius leaves, asking for “lights” => catharsis within a play within a tragedy (remorse). “Oh good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word for a thousand pound” => Hamlet is convinced (jubilation for vengeance). R&G are fed up with the family story, and Hamlet insults them, using wordplay like: playing flute, “’Tis as easy as lying” => Hamlet calls them liars + Hamlet is the instrument of G. so G. should be able to play it. Hamlet even says: “we shall obey” sarcastically using the royal we, also reminding his superiority to R&G. He agrees to go and see his mother. Hamlet continues to insult people, Polonius = “weasel” (sneaky). Hamlet, left alone, denounces the corruption of society. He's nevertheless ready to seek revenge. My mission won't be to hurt my mother, God will do it. I will kill Claudius (motivation, passivity v action, and mother’s sins)
Scene 3
King’s private chapel: R&G + Claudius who wants R&G to come back to England with Hamlet for ‘madness’ but in fact, he knows Hamlet knows and he’s afraid. Hamlet and Gertrude will have a conversation, Polonius will spy to comfort Claudius, because she's a girl so a beast we cannot trust. Alone, He feels guilty, but he cannot be forgiven since he is still the king, has Gertrude etc. He metaphorically tries to kneel but “pray can I not”. Hamlet arrives but won't kill him because he doesn't want Claudius to have a better death than King Hamlet (taking revenge in suffering, tragic flaw => accumulation will lead to busting).

Scene 4
In Gertrude’s ‘private’ (Polonius is spying) room, Hamlet is so vehement Gertrude fear for her life, and call for help. The beginning of their exchange demonstrates Shakespeare’s use of language: Hamlet is fast and scathing (“Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended”; “Mother, thiu hast my father much offended”). Hamlet will never forgive his mother about her new marriage, he even suspects her (“Almost as bad, good mother, as kill a king and marry his brother”). He says it’s not about love, because she’s too old for sex (Hamlet’s obsession on his mother’s sexuality) –“don't go to my father's bed”  Hamlet does not primarily seek revenge, he wants to blame his mother- betrayal): her marriage has to be about power. Hamlet talks to his father as a god, with mythology roots, but his uncle is rotten. Hamlet in this scene acted, he thought he had killed Claudius “Is it the king?”, but no, it’s a “rat”.  The ghost then appears, to blame Hamlet (scared as hell) his revenge is taking too long. Gertrude don’t see the ghost (who’s telling Hamlet to leave his mother alone), and consequently thinks Hamlet’s mad, but Hamlet admits he is not, he urges Gertrude to repent (not to sleep with Claudius again). She promises to keep Hamlet’s pretended madness a secret. Hamlet, victim of destiny (death of Polonius = tragic flaw), has now to return on his path to death. In bracket (text that Shakespeare maybe deleted), Hamlet tells he knows R&G have a letter, and he will have them killed instead of him.

Act IV
It’s the turning point for every characters who have a destiny (the children Hamlet, Laertes and Fortinbras). It is were honour leads to action, leading to revenge. Also, the spectator have a background of political matters in Hamlet’s world. We lost time marks in this act.
Scene 1
Gertrude instructs Claudius Hamlet have killed Polonius, first reaction => “Oh fuck it could have been me” (“Oh heavy deed, it had been so with us had we been there”, fear will now guide his actions). The spectator knows Hamlet was not sorry at all about killing Polonius, but Gertrude covers him and said he was mad and sad (Mother still loves her son, appearance v. reality, regret). Claudius says he ‘loves’ Hamlet (hum hum… :p) even though he could be accused of Polonius’s death, which circumstances shall remain secret. Nevertheless, Claudius wants to take Hamlet away so he won't disturb -or kill- him: “As level as the cannon to his blank, Transport has poisoned shot -may miss our name”, metaphor because he wants to hide his real motives.
Scene 2
R&G came to find out what Hamlet has done with the body. R. is a “sponge” that soaks up the king’s goodwill.

Scene 3 
The king, alone, talks about Polonius’s ghost (foreshadowing, maybe mise en abyme with Laertes) Polonius is a body without soul.  R&G have failed => desperate methods => Hamlet is brought in, taunts A LOT Claudius (“worms” corruption, disgusting; the king is not higher than the beggar, both will be eaten => memento mori + ‘Go in heaven if u don't find him go in another place (go to hell) and follow its smell’ OUUUU) and then reveals the position of the body. Claudius sends him to England. Alone, Claudius reveals the letter plot. During this scene, Claudius speaks in iambic pentameter, not Hamlet (completely disrespectful).

Scene 4
In the sea coast near Elsinore, Fortinbras disembarks. He is here to invade a piece of Poland just to increase kingdom’s power (the land is indeed worthless). Hamlet disagree this attitude, just the fame does not excuse the kill of thousands men (inaction, coward, and more importantly, corruption and sickness of human kind). Hamlet is comparing himself to Fortinbras, who can act -kill thousands of men without a reason- when Hamlet is not even capable of killing his uncle when he has the right. He concludes he is going to act again, in his last soliloquy. (Fortinbras, Hamlet’s foil?)
Scene 5
Ophelia's mad, because she have been loved and left; the text (no iambic pentameter but bullshit) mimes her madness. Is she really a virgin? Because once Hamlet have left, she seems not to be anymore. She is upset that her father have been assassinated. Claudius pities her, he suspects Laertes seeks for revenge, ‘secretly’ coming back from France. Laertes have support to overthrow the king. He enters, angry because his father did not have proper burials. He thinks Claudius killed Polonius but “I am guiltless for your father's death” => I am sorry but not responsible. Ophelia comes, Laertes discovers she's mad. She is giving herbs, each one has a particular signification that the audience at the time knew (“Rosemary, that's for remembrance” of previous Hamlet or of Polonius?). Laertes really wants a big ceremony, with big monument (father idealization). King says if you find that it's me who killed him, I give you everything that I've got, but if it's something else, let's join forces King uses Laertes's anger to control him (Claudius the manipulator). Last time Ophelia appears.

Scene 6
Hamlet is captured by pirates, manage to get back to the castle, and it will be R&G who will be executed. This scene is a flaw, because it's too short (lack of continuity), it's dumb, Pirates are not enough used. It’s told via the reading of a letter.
Scene 7
Claudius and Laertes are planning to kill Hamlet in a duel because Claudius tells it's Hamlet who kill Polonius (Claudius the manipulator). The king didn't want to kill Hamlet directly because Gertrude loves him and Claudius loves Gertrude (almost cried when he said that); furthermore, Hamlet is appreciated by the people => Claudius does not talk about Hamlet’s madness… why? So the duel will be fake (treason, corruption, plots). Laertes's blade will be poisoned and Hamlet's rapier not even blunted. In addition, Hamlet's drink will be poisoned (just in case Laertes’s ‘remarkable skills’ were not enough, we don’t see the accident coming!). Claudius is like the snake who's trying to convince Laertes that he will slay Hamlet in one second. He even asks Laertes if he loves his father (flattery world etc.). We learn Ophelia’s death, Gertrude's reason is false, in fact Ophelia committed suicide but it forbidden (Ophelia at least share that with Hamlet, and the madness).Claudius uses this to make Laertes even more upset (manipulation, if I have not said it) + “Lamord” (weapon master of Laertes) => La mort (he went to France) = death.

Act V
Well, everyone dies, except Horatio who has to tell the wonderful story of Hamlet the moody.
Scene 1
Comic scene, otherwise it would have been too long, with the clowns and all moody bloody Hamlet. Even the gravediggers of the time criticise the fact that she committed suicide and she's buried (even them knows that she committed suicide). Property of easiness. Hamlet seems to be a victim of wordplay (“for your dull ass will not mend his pace with beating”). He is very melancholic and says that whatever life you have you will still die and be a skull at the end (memento mori, he wonders who’s skull it is). Shakespeare auto-parodies himself, making it funny. Hamlet is disgusted by the attitude of the gravedigger (throwing the skull as if it was not holy), Hamlet goes on to attributing it to a ‘respectable’ lawyer (oxymoron? :p ; land and death). Hamlet wants to know who’s grave it his (puns “mine” says the gravedigger), the clown replies “that was a woman sir; but, rest her soul, she’s dead” (Hamlet doesn’t realise it’s Ophelia). We then learns Hamlet is about thirty years old. The skull belongs to Yorick, (“Alas poor Yorick!” Melancholia), King Hamlet’s jester. => Hamlet talks about Alexander the Great: we all end up being ashes (physical corruption reminding him his mother!). Laertes spots Hamlet in the grave, he complains about how he loved his sister. Hamlet realise he’s in Ophelia’s grave. Laertes tries to strangle Hamlet: “I prithee take thy fingers from my throat” (comic). There is no indication whether they fight in or out the grave. They then fight who loved more Ophelia (Hamlet: “I loved Ophelia; forty thousand brothers Could not with all their quantity of love Make up my sum”) => we know Hamlet loved Ophelia in the end. Foreshadow “Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son” (from cousin to kin, to our son, to your son) => Claudius has in mind the upcoming duel.

Scene 2
Hamlet talking to Horatio about the letter Claudius had written (“My head should be struck off” (Christian image because protestants hang  Christian ruled Britain at this time). He says he find it by instinct (“divinity shapes our end”: Destiny). Hamlet changed the letter, “he should those bearer put to sudden death”; fortunately he had the Dane's seal (Shakespeare is not very fine for the pirate’s plot). R&G arrive in England, thinking they have the letter and give it to the king (R&G are dead) Hamlet does not regret: cold in revenge, finally a man. The reason Hamlet will avenge: “killed my father and whored my mother” (father idealization and mum's sexuality). Osric tells Hamlet he has a wager on his head. He speaks in an over-elaborated style, break the drama; he is a yes-men (flattery) like Polonius; maybe he wants to replace him (society game/theatre). We learn Laertes came back because he was broke and apparently, he is an excellent swordfighter. Osric explains how the fight is going to take place, but apparently, it's just an amusement duel, no one should die, just three hits; but there is the wager, the bet. Horatio tells Hamlet he has not chance (lack of faith), he wants Hamlet to apologies, what Hamlet does (and Laertes accept them, but it's a bit hypocritical), but they still fight (amusement). The king is explaining how the poisoned cup shall be drink by Hamlet when he hits. Hamlet gets the first hit, he should drink but prefer to do it after. Comes back to “our son” (Claudius the manipulator) Gertrude toasts his son (does she know the cup is poisoned?) Claudius tries to stop her, without a lot of conviction (he deserves to die for the spectator). Second hit for Hamlet. Besides, Laertes even have an existential crisis “almost against my conscience” => realizes he have been manipulated. Bleeding, Hamlet realises it is a real fight, they exchange swords during their fencing, and he stabs Laertes, who repents. Gertrude dies => Hamlet makes Claudius drinks and stabbed him. (duty). Hamlet dies, after a lot (I am dead, blablabla, “the rest is silence” blablab etc.). Horation: “good night sweet prince” (Everybody dies, Shakespeare follows Greek tragedy tradition). Fortinbras arrives, he will rule Denmark (Duty, power). Ambassador arrive at the end of the story, waiting for thanks to have killed R&G (comic). Leaving the question : what caused the tragedy?

